[Music]
for the founding queen sharing her nest
with all these rivals seems like madness
but the economics of desert survival is
a numbers game and for the moment at
least this communal life is the key to
her future each Queen now lays her first
batch of tiny eggs each no bigger than a
pinhead
many new nests contain two or three
Queens limiting the initial brood to
less than 100 eggs but these 10 Queens
have produced well over 300 eggs and
when they hatch the colony will become
an instant superpower
for the founding Queen this is the main
advantage to taking in lodgers
[Music]
if the eggs are not kept clean and
coated with antibiotic saliva they would
quickly be smothered by fungi and rot
away
the eggs soon hatch fed by the Queens
the voracious larvae grow quickly and
then pupate a few weeks after the eggs
were laid the first tiny pail workers
emerge from these silky cocoons
all and workers are female and sterile
unable to reproduce themselves their
sole purpose in life is to serve the
Queens
they darken as their bodies become
harder and then they are ready to take
up their duties some stay underground
tending to the Queens and to the
remaining brood others head for the
surface for a first look at their
strange new world in the Royal chamber
the queen has yet to restart her normal
duties before her journey she stopped
egg production in order to slim down and
make traveling easier
now like a virgin queen she produces a
special scent that attracts winged male
ants who fly in from other nests the
male is also enormous on a similar scale
to the queen the sense she produces are
irresistible
just a few molecules we'll grab a male's
attention
he searches for a way into the nest but
a guard patrollers found him and at
first the other ants see em as food he's
actually in mortal danger
the army smothers him as if he were prey
but their intentions falter
he also produces cents to demonstrate
his fitness to be consort if he passes
master he'll they accepted if he doesn't
he'll be for the job they tried to clip
his wings so he'll fit through the nest
entrance but he cooperates using spikes
at the end of his abdomen he pulls one
of himself
nothing is wasted even a wing has some
nutritional value the rest of the
workers take him into the nest
he has their support at least for the
time being he's on probation until he
actually mates with the Queen he could
still be attacked another wing is
removed
[Music]
he'll soon be presentable for his
audience with the Queen
it's day five in the new territory
there's no nuptial flight instead the
Queen's new consort is glided directly
to the Royal chamber he's not the first
consort to the Queen and he probably
won't be the last driver and Queens are
for ants and usually promiscuous he'll
be one of many suitors shield entertain
during her lifetime his job done he
retires from the Royal chamber and dies
a short but productive life for he'll
father several million new ants with
hungry mouths slugs are fair game for
driver ants they don't run away the
first ant makes contact
and then another the others come running
the slug tries to sit out the attack
there are so many ants a victim uses the
only escape route left to it
the ants fall too they often use this
unconventional way to get down from the
trees but the unfortunate slug has
fallen from the frying pan into the fire
an awful lot of ants are milling about
down here
they smother their prey but the slug has
a trick up its sleeve it may be slow but
it's well protected
it's entire body is covered in a thick
and noxious slime it's so gluttonous
that once their jaws are in they can't
get them out other ants seem to give a
helping hand
but this one is firmly stuck
try as she might she just can't get away
[Music]
for some it's not just their jaws that
attract
[Music]
which is almost free then something
remarkable happens some of the workers
begin to bring particles of soil and
place them on the slug in this way the
slime is soaked up like ink on blotting
paper gradually the slug disappears
under a writhing mass of earth and ants
with its protective coat neutralized the
ants attacked the slug underneath slowly
- the victim is sliced up
by pooling their resources the Queens
have survived their first major
challenge but this coalition can't last
tensions are already on the rise of the
Queens jostle for position within the
royal court the weaker crouched
submissively before the more dominant
including the founding Queen
so begins the delicate maneuvering that
will soon take on a deadly significance
those at the bottom of the hierarchy
have little chance of surviving the
coming trials
another struggle for control is also
beginning above-ground the corral nest
is not the only one in Horseshoe Canyon
the desert floor is littered with
similar sized colonies and there's not
enough room for all of them
now the darker side of the honey ants
emerges it's time for the corral colony
to mount a preemptive strike on its
nearest neighbors
this killing spree continues through the
summer until the corral colony has
eliminated all the other new nests in
their immediate neighborhood
the foundations of the Empire have been
laid underground two events have taken a
darker turn one of the Queen's lies dead
in the Royal chamber it's not clear why
but the workers have started singling
out the weaker Queens for special
attention at first it's all very subtle
one isn't fed so often or cleaned as
diligently
but then the workers start bullying and
harassing their chosen victim
finally it spills over into direct
attack and the workers tear the chosen
queen to pieces
nothing can go to waste even a royal
caucus
workers carry hungry larvae over to
feast on the dead Queen including many
that must have been our own offspring
[Music]
as the week's pass the revolution
continues only the most dominant Royals
seem immune to attack they just watch
and wait as the workers go about their
gruesome business by late summer the
corral tanks contain the only standing
water the kilometers around the canyons
more mobile insects are drawn to this
one last oasis for those able to travel
this water is a lifesaver
[Music]
bees and wasps can carry the water back
to their distant nests but this tiny
pool of water lies just beyond the
boundary of the corral colonies
territory
[Music]
but no end in sight such desperate times
call for desperate measures as the
search widens a small group of Corral
workers head towards the trough this is
unfamiliar ground for them they are
heading toward disaster near the trough
they stumble across other honey ants and
then a nest entrance
it's only 40 meters from the corral
colony that that's been enough to keep
these two nests in mutual ignorance for
all these years
these new honey ants are unlike any the
Corral workers have encountered before
they are big and aggressive instead of
backing down they meet the challenge
head-on and the encounter begins to
escalate for the first time in its
history
the Corral colony may have met its match
sensing the worst the Corral workers
begin to fall back toward their own nest
the trough workers go on the offensive
the retreat quickly turns into a rout
stragglers are picked off
the fight is carried right to the
entrance of the corral colony
even here on their own doorstep they
can't hold their ground
the attacking trough workers drive on
into the nest
as news of the attack reaches the corral
Queen she withdraws to the deepest
chambers her entourage of nurses in tow
carrying the valuable brood
the battle spreads down into the tunnels
slowly inexorably it spreads down
through the shafts towards the deeper
part of the nest
[Music]
the repeats are slaughtered
or dragged away to be eaten later
some dead workers are carried off for
processing
the invaders take everything from eggs
to newborns
[Music]
many are eaten where they fall
they empty chamber after chamber
[Music]
finally the invaders overcome the last
resistance and breakthrough into the
Royal bunker
the Corral Queen and her broods are
trapped and completely helpless held by
each leg the queen is on the rack first
stretched then dismembered
it is a gruesome and ignominious end for
this once great ruler
[Music]
in just a few hours the corral colony
has been annihilated
the nest emptied
too late for the corral colony the
drought finally breaks
a great storm heralded the start of the
corral Queens story and now eight years
later another marks its brutal end but
somewhere out in the desert the Queen's
royal daughters are fighting their own
battles
continuing her dynasty
[Music]